(inspiring music)
Instructor: Welcome back.
In this section we're gonna look at VLANs
or virtual local area networks.
We are gonna virtualize our infrastructure.
Virtualization is a big topic today
with companies such as VMware virtualizing servers,
but VLANs have been around for many years.
And in a similar way,
we're gonna be virtualizing our switches,
where one physical switch is virtually multiple switches.
This is not full virtualization,
we're just virtualizing the local area networks
on that specific switch.
So, I wanna give you an overview of VLANs
and how they operate.
We need to talk about trunking protocols
like 802.1Q and ISL, or inter switch link.
I wanna explain virtual trunking protocol or VTP,
which allows us to create VLANs on a single switch
and have that VLAN information propagated
to other switches in the topology.
VTP can be a very useful protocol,
but can be extremely dangerous
and has caused a lot of problems
for Cisco engineers over the years,
and these days a lot of us will just turn it off
and never use it because of its inherent dangers.
Now, an incorrectly designed network
or poorly-designed network has multiple issues.
In this simple topology as a example,
we have a switch with a hub.
This is a single broadcast domain.
So, if this host A started broadcasting
that broadcast would be received by everyone.
Now, that may not be a problem,
but if the NIC starts jabbering, in other words,
sending out broadcast after broadcast after broadcast,
it can flood through your entire network
and cause a lot of issues, as every device in the network
needs to process that broadcast.
This issue exponentially increases
as the number of hosts on the network increases.
More and more hosts are sending broadcasts,
more and more hosts are affected by those broadcasts,
and thus broadcasts should be contained or limited
as far as possible.
This is an example of a poorly-designed network.
If this central switch went down
it would affect all devices in the topology.
No hosts would be able to communicate with each other
because all communication needs to go via this single device
which is now a single point of failure.
Broadcasts, once again, will flood throughout the network.
The broadcast is received on all links
and will consume the bandwidth
on every single link in this topology.
Once again, every single device
has to process that broadcast
and its CPU will be interrupted by the broadcast.
Continuous broadcasts will slow down the entire network.
Because of the way MAC address tables work,
traffic going to a unicast address,
where the MAC address is not learned by the switches,
will also be flooded throughout the topology.
Multicasts are treated in the same way as broadcasts
by most Layer 2 switches, so multicast will be flooded
throughout the network and affect all devices.
A poorly-designed network may be disorganized
and poorly documented
and lack easily identified traffic flows,
which make support, maintenance, and problem resolution
very time consuming and very difficult.
You also have the issue of security.
If this host on the left hand side is in marketing
and the host on the right hand side
is in the accounts department, the person in marketing
has access to that machine across the network
because security might not be implemented properly.
It becomes very difficult
to manage a poorly-designed network.
So, what is a virtual LAN or VLAN?
A VLAN is essentially a single broadcast domain
or logical subnet or logical network.
You could say it's a group of hosts
with a common set of requirements
attached to the same broadcast domain
regardless of where they are physically located.
You are able to group multiple devices together
logically rather than physically,
so, it is possible to span a subnet or VLAN
across multiple switches,
even though that's not recommended today.
You can design a VLAN structure
that allows you to group together stations
or hosts that are segmented logically by functions,
project teams, and other types of applications,
once again, without regard to physical location.
So, some of the advantages of VLANs include segmentation,
where you segment or separate users based on function.
For instance, the sales department
will go into a specific VLAN
and the accountancy department
will go into a different VLAN.
It's very flexible.
Without changing physical cabling,
you can move a user from one VLAN to another.
It also provides security
because users are in separate VLANs,
and therefore have to traverse a Layer 3 device,
like a router, to get from one VLAN to another.
On the router, you can implement access lists
to control which users have access to various VLANs.
We'll be talking a lot about access lists
later in the course, but for now understand
that it gives you the ability to enhance security
by separating users.
These days, VLANs also have other advantages,
specifically when implementing voiceover IP.
You can put your IP phones
into a separate VLAN to your workstations
and therefore provide a better quality of service
to the IP phones.
So, implementing VLANs has many advantages
in modern networks today.
Something that I find that always confuses people
is the difference between a physical topology
and a logical topology.
You need to change your paradigm and no longer think
about the physical topology of the network,
but rather envision what the logical topology looks like.
The logical topology will be very different
to the physical topology as soon as VLANs are implemented.
So, here's an example of what a physical topology
may look like.
You have four physical machines
connected to a single physical switch
on ports 0/1, 0/2, 0/3, and 0/4.
So, that's the physical topology.
However, logically we can put interfaces
into different VLANs.
So, all you need to do is go onto the interface,
and I'll show you the commands in a moment,
and you put that interface into a specific VLAN.
Let's say for argument's sake, the red VLAN.
Now, VLANs on switches are configured with numbers,
but often when we discuss VLANs we talk about colors
to try and differentiate between the VLANs
and make it easier to understand.
So, assume for the moment that PC A
and PC D have been put into the red VLAN
by typing commands on the switch ports.
PC B and PC C have been put into the green VLAN.
Please note that the hosts are oblivious to what's happened.
You as the administrator have just gone onto the switch
and changed the VLAN that the port belongs to.
By default, all ports belong to VLAN 1 on Cisco switches,
but by using a single command,
you can move that port to a separate VLAN.
So, once again, the physical topology looks as follows,
but you've just gotta imagine
that these PCs are in separate VLANs.
However, when looking at the logical topology,
things are dramatically different.
PC A and PC D are in the red VLAN on our switch.
PC C and PC B are on the green VLAN.
Logically, there are two separate switches
or two separate LANs here.
We have virtualized our LAN infrastructure
and created two separate local area networks.
These networks cannot communicate with each other
from a Layer 2 point of view.
VLANs are implemented at Layer 2
and the only way to move from one VLAN to another
is to go via a Layer 3 device such as a router.
Remember please, a VLAN is a separate logical subnet
or separate broadcast domain.
If A sent a broadcast
that broadcast would only be received by D.
If C sent a broadcast
that broadcast would only be received by B.
Which is very different were all the devices
on the same VLAN or same physical switch.
Once again, ports can be put into a VLAN
using different mechanisms.
For the moment, just assume that you as the administrator
statically put the port into the relevant VLAN.
So, going back to our physical view of the topology,
in this topology we're not gonna use 48-bit MAC addresses
because I want to simplify what's going on.
So, just assume that these numbers A, B, C, and D
are the MAC addresses of these devices.
When A sends a broadcast
that broadcast will be forwarded to the switch
with a source address of A
and the destination will contain Fs,
in other words, broadcast.
When that frame hits the switch, the switch will make a note
of which VLAN that port belongs to.
So, that frame is internally tagged with the red VLAN.
Please note the PC is oblivious to what's going on.
The PC just sees this link as standard ethernet
and doesn't understand the concept of VLANs.
I'm gonna digress just for a second.
The architecture of switches vary.
Cisco have documents like this one
explaining the architecture of a 6500 switch.
So, for example, looking at the different chassis
and different line cards and different supervisors,
this document will explain how the architecture is set up.
The detail of this is totally outta the scope of the course,
but it's just to try and explain
a little bit about what happens behind the scenes.
One of the things that they explain in this document
is the day in the life of a packet going through a 6500.
And in this example they've got centralized forwarding.
So, they'll explain how a packet will arrive on an interface
and based on different
application-specific integrated circuits or ASICs,
how that packet will flow from the ingress port
to an egress port, going via the data bus
on the back plane of the switch.
You can learn more about the actual flow of the packet
through the switch, by going and looking at
documents like this.
All I want you to realize
is that the architecture of different switches
work differently, and if you wanna look at
the internals of a switch there are really good documents
on Cisco's website explaining how packets flow
through a switch.
For this course, we're gonna explain it as follows.
When the frame arrives on this port
it's internally tagged with a red VLAN.
That frame is then copied to all other ports on the switch.
However, that broadcast will not be forwarded
out of this port because the port is in a different VLAN
to the original frame.
The frame will also not be forwarded out of this port 0/3,
because the frame is in a different VLAN to the port.
However, on this port, the frame will be forwarded out
because the VLAN number or color is the same.
Please note, only the original frame
is sent out of the port.
No internal tagging leaves the switch.
The PCs, once again, are oblivious to any tagging
or changing of frames.
So, the frame leaves the switch
and arrives at PC D in its original form.
Source address is A, destination address is a broadcast.
So, physically we have one switch here,
but logically PC A can only send traffic to PC D,
not to PC B or PC C, they are on a separate VLAN
or separate logical switch.
If A tried to send a unicast to C,
so, the source address is A in the frame,
and the destination address is C,
which is this PC on the green VLAN.
That frame would be sent to the switch
as a standard ethernet frame.
Now, we're assuming here that A has somehow learned
the Mac address of C.
So, he is sending a frame directly to C.
Normally, you wouldn't even be able
to learn that MAC address.
So, in this example, the person on A could be up to no good.
The frame arrives at the switch
and the switch tags the frame internally with the red VLAN.
That frame is copied to all ports on the switch.
Now, once again, that depends on the switch architecture.
So, let's just assume for the moment
that that's what's gonna happen on this specific switch.
Now, the central ASIC checks the MAC address table
and sees that C can be found on port 0/3.
So, the central ASIC sends a flush message
to the other ports to remove the copies of the frame.
So, the frame is only available on port 0/3.
However, just before sending out the frame
the port VLAN color is checked against the frame.
The frame is a red VLAN frame
because it arrived on a red port,
but this is a green VLAN interface,
so, the frame is not transmitted and is dropped.
So, the frame never gets to PC C.
Therefore, A is not able to access the green VLAN.
Logically A is separated from C,
and from a Layer 2 point of view,
there is no connection between the red VLAN
and the green VLAN.
As mentioned previously, the only way to get
from one VLAN to another is to traverse
a Layer 3 device such as a router.
And as there's no router in this example,
the traffic is totally separated.
Now, here's a slightly more complicated example.
A is still in the red VLAN,
but is connected to switch one.
D is in the red VLAN,
but is in this case connected to switch two.
C is in the green VLAN, connected to switch two.
And B is in the green VLAN connected to switch one.
A special type of link is required between the two switches,
so that they can communicate VLAN information between them
and that is known as a trunk port.
This interface will run a trunking protocol,
so that VLAN information can be transmitted
from one switch to another.
The two trunking protocols that are used
are ISL or inter switch link, and 802.1Q.
Now, ISL was a Cisco proprietary protocol
and tends not to be used today.
802.1Q, the industry standard, is the protocol of choice
for communicating VLAN information between switches
across trunking ports.
Now, once again, it's important to remember
what the physical topology looks like, which is as follows.
And then the logical topology, which looks this.
PC A is connected to switch one,
PC C is connected to switch two,
but they are in the red VLAN.
PC B is connected to switch one,
and PC D is connected to switch two,
but they're on the green VLAN.
So, there's logical separation between the devices
across the two switches.
Physically, please remember, there are only two switches
in this topology, but logically we are creating
four switches with the red VLAN separated
from the green VLAN, and the switches are linked
using a trunking interface.
So, trunking once again, allows multiple VLANs
to traverse a single physical link.
The two protocols are 802.1Q, the industry standard,
which tends to be used today,
and ISL, which was Cisco's proprietary method,
which tends not to be used in today's environments.
Cisco IP phones, for example, do not support ISL,
and a lot of new switches do not provide support for ISL.
So, in this course we are gonna concentrate on 802.1Q.
An 802.1Q frame is different to a standard ethernet frame.
A standard ethernet frame would look something like this.
You have a destination field, a source field,
a length or ether type field, you have the data,
and then you have the frame check sequence.
An 802.1Q frame has a four-byte tag
inserted into the header between the source address field
and the ether type or length field.
Because the frame has been altered,
the frame check sequence is recomputed
and replaced in the modified frame.
The tag consists of two main parts,
the tag protocol identifier, which is set to 0x8100
to identify this as an IEEE 802.1 tag frame,
and thus allow switches and devices to distinguish
an 802.1Q frame from untagged frames.
This is 16 bits in length or two bytes.
The remaining two bytes or 16 bits is split as follows.
Three bits represent the priority or priority code point,
which is a three-bit field used to prioritize
certain traffic types over others.
This is used very heavily in quality of service
where for instance, a decimal value of five
is used to represent voice.
The canonical format identifier or CFI
was used in the old days for compatibility
between ethernet and token-ring networks.
It's very unlikely that you're gonna use that today.
And the important piece is the VLAN identifier,
which is a 12-bit field specifying the VLAN
to which this frame belongs.
A value of zero would mean that this frame
does not belong to any VLAN.
It's because of this field
that switches are able to communicate
the VLAN number to each other.
It is 12 bits in size, which allows for 4,096 VLANs
to be created in an 802.1Q environment.
You can work that out as follows,
two to the power of 12 equals 4,096.
So, in theory, 4,096 VLANs could be configured
on an 802.1Q switch.
Switches, however, do not necessarily support
that number of VLANs.
(inspiring music)